<!--
  ~ Copyright (c) godot-rust; Bromeon and contributors.
  ~ This Source Code Form is subject to the terms of the Mozilla Public
  ~ License, v. 2.0. If a copy of the MPL was not distributed with this
  ~ file, You can obtain one at https://mozilla.org/MPL/2.0/.
-->

# Migrating to v0.2

This chapter will guide you through the changes from godot-rust version 0.1 to 0.2. See also our [November dev update][dev-november-2024]
for a feature overview, and our [changelog][changelog] for a detailed list of modifications. Breaking changes are marked as such in the
changelog, and you can navigate to the respective PRs to get in-depth information.


## Godot version support

With godot-rust 0.2, Godot **4.3** is supported out of the box.

Godot 4.0 is no longer supported. We're the last binding to abandon it, after 1.5 years. 4.0 offers no compatibility with today's GDExtension API,
not even among patch versions, so using it at this point is not recommended.


## Argument passing

The biggest breaking change in 0.2 is the way arguments are passed to Godot APIs. What used to be pass-by-value everywhere, has now more
nuance, while making calling code more concise.

The following table goes into different kinds of arguments and corresponding call expressions.

| Argument type              | Parameter type (v0.1 ⇾ v0.2)          | v0.1 call                      | v0.2 call       |
|----------------------------|---------------------------------------|--------------------------------|-----------------|
| `i32` (`Copy`)             | `i32`                                 | `func(i)`                      | `func(i)`       |
| `GString`                  | `GString` ⇾ `impl AsArg<GString>`     | `func(s)`<br>`func(s.clone())` | `func(&s)`      |
| `&str`                     | "                                     | `func("str".into())`           | `func("str")`   |
| `String`                   | "                                     | `func(s.into())`               | `func(&s)`      |
| `StringName`<br>`NodePath` | "                                     | `func(s.into())`               | `func(s.arg())` |
| `Gd<Node>`                 | `Gd<Node>` ⇾ `impl AsObjectArg<Node>` | `func(g.clone())`              | `func(&g)`      |
| `Gd<Node2D>`               | "                                     | `func(g.clone().upcast())`     | `func(&g)`      |

Most of them are straightforward, noteworthy is maybe `arg()` as a way to convert between the 3 Godot string types.
This conversion is done explicitly, because it's much less obvious than conversion from `String`/`&str` but can have significant
performance implications due to allocations, re-encoding and synchronization overhead. It also makes you more aware of the string
type in use.


## Removed APIs

See also [#808]. Noteworthy changes:

- Renamed crate feature `custom-godot` ⇾ `api-custom`.
- Godot enums now use `SHOUT_CASE` enumerators. `PascalCase` aliases have been around for some time, but not anymore.
- `GString::chars_checked()` and `GString::chars_unchecked()` have been removed. There's no more need for unsafety; use `GString::chars()` instead.
- Several collection methods have been migrated, e.g. `Dictionary::try_get()` ⇾ `get()`, `Packed*Array::set()` ⇾ `[]`.
- Removed ancient pre-0.1 modules `godot::engine`, `godot::log`.
- The `#[base]` attribute is no longer allowed.


## Miscellaneous

- Some use cases now require a `Base<T>` field that wasn't previously needed, e.g. `OnReady<T>`.
- Virtual functions that are semantically required by Godot are now also required in the `I*` interface trait in Rust.
  That is, you must override them in your `impl` block.
- There are new validations around `Export` and `#[class(tool)]`, which no longer accept previously compiling (but broken) code.


[#808]: https://github.com/godot-rust/gdext/pull/808
[changelog]: https://github.com/godot-rust/gdext/blob/master/Changelog.md#v020
[dev-november-2024]: https://godot-rust.github.io/dev/november-2024-update
