<!--
  ~ Copyright (c) godot-rust; Bromeon and contributors.
  ~ This Source Code Form is subject to the terms of the Mozilla Public
  ~ License, v. 2.0. If a copy of the MPL was not distributed with this
  ~ file, You can obtain one at https://mozilla.org/MPL/2.0/.
-->

# Migrating to v0.3

This chapter will guide you through the changes from godot-rust version 0.2 to 0.3. See also our [May dev update][dev-may-2025]
for a feature overview, and our [changelog][changelog] for a detailed list of modifications. Breaking changes are marked as such in the
changelog, and you can navigate to the respective PRs to get in-depth information.

```admonish tip title="Smooth transition"
To reduce the friction, we recommend first updating to the latest patch release of the current minor version, before switching to the new 
minor version. Many changes are announced early in the form of deprecation warnings, which contain instructions on how to switch to newer APIs.

You can update your `Cargo.toml` to the latest patch release by running:
~~~bash
cargo update -p godot
~~~
Once you have addressed all deprecation warnings, you can update to the new minor version:
~~~bash
cargo upgrade -p godot
~~~
```


## Geometric APIs

Several geometric APIs have seen slight updates in terms of naming and semantics.

- `Aabb`, `Rect2`, `Rect2i` ([#1001](https://github.com/godot-rust/gdext/pull/1001))
  - `has_point` -> `contains_point`
  - `has_area` -> `has_surface`
  - `intersection` -> `intersect`
  - `intersect_ray`: added in addition to `intersects_ray`, returning intersection point
- `Basis` + `Quaternion` ([#1035](https://github.com/godot-rust/gdext/pull/1035))
  - `to_euler` -> `get_euler` + `get_euler_with`
  - `to_quat` -> `get_quaternion`
  - `from_quat` -> `from_quaternion`
  - `scale` -> `get_scale`
  - `new_looking_at` -> `looking_at`

The main idea behind those changes:

- Use `intersect` for methods returning the intersection, and `intersects` for boolean checks.
- Use `contains` for containment checks, and `has` for checking the presence of a property.
- Use `get_` in situations where only a part is extracted (e.g. `get_euler` instead of `to_euler`, because Basis has non-rotation components).
- Be closer to Godot terminology.


## Signals

While v0.3 brings [large-scale changes to signals][signals], they are almost fully backwards compatible.
The main breaking change is that declaring `#[signal]` now requires the class to have a `Base<T>` field.
If you don't need the new type-safe signal API, you can opt out with `#[godot_api(no_typed_signals)]` on your `impl` block.

Relatedly, the `ConnectFlags` enum has been reclassified as a bitfield rather than regular enum. This enables `|` operations, among others.


## Final classes

Godot prevents certain classes from being inherited outside the engine, for example `FileAccess` or `IP`. This used to cause runtime errors
whose messages weren't always clear.

godot-rust v0.3 properly declares such classes as "final", which has the following implications:

- Rust classes can no longer inherit from them (doing so results in a descriptive compile error).
- The associated interface trait (e.g. `IFileAccess`, `IIp`) no longer exists, since you can neither construct a base nor implement
  virtual methods. In total, 118 `I*` traits have been removed.
- API Docs clearly state which classes are final, and elaborates the relation between an interface trait and its base interfaces.


## Rename of unsafe virtual methods

Some virtual methods declare raw pointers in their parameters or return types, for example:

```rust
trait IAudioStreamPlayback {
    unsafe fn mix(&mut self, buffer: *mut AudioFrame, 
                  rate_scale: f32, frames: i32) -> i32;
}
```

In the future, we would like to transition these to safe methods. To enable a gradual migration period with coexisting safe and unsafe
variants, we renamed all such methods now, by appending the `_rawptr` suffix:

```rust
trait IAudioStreamPlayback {
    unsafe fn mix_rawptr(&mut self, buffer: *mut AudioFrame, 
                         rate_scale: f32, frames: i32) -> i32;
}
```

Details can be seen in pull request [#1174].


## Entry point

In case you use `#[gdextension(entry_point = ...)]`, the key has now been renamed to `#[gdextension(entry_symbol = ...)]`. This is consistent
with the key name in the `.gdextension` file.


[signals]: ../register/signals.md
[changelog]: https://github.com/godot-rust/gdext/blob/master/Changelog.md#v030
[dev-may-2025]: https://godot-rust.github.io/dev/may-2025-update/
[#1174]: https://github.com/godot-rust/gdext/pull/1174
